The following is a conversation with Bjarn Strelstrom. He's the creator of C++,
programming language that after 40 years is still one of the most popular and powerful languages in
the world. Its focus on fast, stable, robust code underlies many of the biggest systems in the world
that we have come to rely on as a society. If you're watching this on YouTube, for example,
many of the critical back-end components of YouTube are written in C++. Same goes for Google,
Facebook, Amazon, Twitter, most Microsoft applications, Adobe applications, most database
systems, and most physical systems that operate in the real world, like cars, robots, rockets that
launch us into space, and one day will land us on Mars. C++ also happens to be the language
that I use more than any other in my life. I've written several hundred thousand lines of C++
source code. Of course, lines of source code don't mean much, but they do give hints of my
personal journey through the world of software. I've enjoyed watching the development of C++
as a programming language leading up to the big update in the standard in 2011 and those that
followed in 14, 17, and toward the new C++20 standard hopefully coming out next year.
This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube, give it
five stars on iTunes, support it on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter at Lex
Friedman, spelled F-R-I-D-M-A-N. And now, here's my conversation with Bjorn Strauss-Straub.
What was the first program you've ever written? Do you remember?
It was my second year in university, first year of computer science, and it was an Algor-60.
I calculated the shape of a super ellipse and then connected points on the perimeter,
creating star patterns. It was with a wedding on a paper printer.
And that was in college, university?
Yeah. I learned to program the second year in university.
And what was the first programming language, if I may ask it this way, that you fell in love with?
I think Algor-60. And after that, I remember Snowball. I remember Fortran didn't fall in love
with that. I remember Pascal didn't fall in love with that. It all got in the way of me.
And then I just covered Assembler, and that was much more fun.
And from there, I went to microcode.
So you were drawn to the, you found the low-level stuff beautiful?
I went through a lot of languages, and then I spent significant time in Assembler and
microcode. That was sort of the first really profitable things I paid for my masters, actually.
And then I discovered Simula, which was absolutely great.
Simula?
Simula was the extension of Algor-60 done primarily for simulation, but basically they
invented object-oriented programming at inheritance and runtime polymorphism while they were doing it.
And that was a language that taught me that you could have the sort of the problems of a program
grow with the size of the program rather than with the square of the size of the program.
That is, you can actually modularize very nicely. And that was a surprise to me.
It was also a surprise to me that a stricter type system than Pascal's was helpful, whereas Pascal's
type system got in my way all the time. So you need a strong type system to organize your code well,
but it has to be extensible and flexible.
Let's get into the details a little bit. If you remember, what kind of type system did Pascal have?
What type system, typing system did Algor-60 have?
Basically, Pascal was sort of the simplest language that Niklaus Wiert could define that
served the needs of Niklaus Wiert at the time. And it has a sort of a highly moral tone to it.
That is, if you can say it in Pascal, it's good. And if you can't, it's not so good.
Whereas, Simula, allowed you basically to build your own type system.
So instead of trying to fit yourself into Niklaus Wiert's world,
Christen Nürburgring's language and Oliohan Dahl's language allowed you to build your own.
So it's sort of close to the original idea of you build a domain specific language.
As a matter of fact, what you build is a set of types and relations among types
that allows you to express something that's suitable for an application.
When you say types, stuff you're saying has echoes of object during a programming.
Yes, they invented it. Every language that uses the word class for type
is a descendant of Simula, directly or indirectly.
Christen Nürburgring and Oliohan Dahl were mathematicians and they didn't think in terms of
types, but they understood sets and classes of elements. And so they called their types classes.
And basically in C++, as in Simula classes, a user-defined type.
So can you try the impossible task and give a brief history of programming languages from
your perspective? So we started with ALGOL 60, Simula, Pascal, but that's just the 60s and 70s.
I can try. The most sort of interesting and major improvement of programming languages was
FORTRAN, the first FORTRAN. Because before that, ALGOL was written for a specific machine and each
specific machine had a language, a simply language or a cross-impler or some extension of that idea.
But you are writing for a specific machine in the term, in the language of that machine.
And Barker and his team at IBM built a language that would allow you to write what you really
wanted. That is, you could write it in a language that was natural for people. Now these people
happened to be engineers and physicists, so the language that came out was somewhat unusual for
the rest of the world. But basically they said formula translation because they wanted to have
the mathematical formulas translated into the machine. And as a side effect, they got portability
because now they are writing in the terms that the humans used and the way humans thought.
And then they had a program that translated it into the machine's needs. And that was new and
that was great. And it's something to remember. We want to raise the language to the human level,
but we don't want to lose the efficiency. And that was the first step towards the human?
That was the first step. And of course, there were very particular kinds of humans. Business
people were different, so they got co-born instead and et cetera, et cetera. And Simula came
out. No, let's not go to Simula yet. Let's go to Algon. Fortran didn't have at the time the notions of
not a precise notion of type, not a precise notion of scope, not a set of translation faces that was
what we have today, lexical, syntax, semantics. It was sort of a bit of a model in the early days,
but hey, they've just done the big breakthrough in the history of programming, right? So you
can't criticize them for not having gotten all the technical details right. So we got Algon.
That was very pretty. And most people in commerce and science considered it useless because it was
not flexible enough and it wasn't efficient enough and et cetera, et cetera. But that was the breakthrough
from the technical point of view. And then Simula came along to make that idea more flexible.
And you could define your own types. And that's where I got very interested.
Christen Nygge, who's the main idea man behind Simula.
That was late 60s.
This was late 60s. Well, I was a visiting professor in Aarhus. And so I learned object
oriented programming by sitting around and, well, in theory, discussing with Christen Nygge.
But Christen, once you get started and in full flow, it's very hard to get a word in
edge ways. It was great. I learned it from there.
Not to romanticize the notion, but it seems like a big leap to think about or object-oriented
programming. It's really a leap of abstraction. And was that as big and beautiful of a leap
as it seems from now in retrospect? Or was it an obvious one at the time?
It was not obvious. And many people have tried to do something like that. And most people didn't
come up with something as wonderful as Simula. Lots of people got their PhDs and made their careers
out of forgetting about Simula or never knowing it. For me, the key idea was basically I could get
my own types. And that's the idea that goes further into C++, where I can get better types
and more flexible types and more efficient types. But it's still the fundamental idea.
When I want to write a program, I want to write it with my types. That is appropriate to my problem
and under the constraints that I'm under with hardware, software, environment, etc.
And that's the key idea. People picked up on the class hierarchies and the virtual functions
and the inheritance. And that was only part of it. It was an interesting and major part and
still a major part in a lot of graphic stuff. But it was not the most fundamental. It was
when you wanted to relate one type to another, you don't want them all to be independent.
The classical example is that you don't actually want to write city simulation with vehicles,
where you say, well, if it's a bicycle, write the code for turning a bicycle to the left,
if it's a normal car, turn right the normal carway, if it's a fire engine, turn right the fire engine
way, you get these big case statements and bunches of if statements and such. Instead, you tell the
base class that that's the vehicle and say, turn left the way you want to.
And this is actually a real example. They used it to simulate and optimize the emergency services
for somewhere in Norway back in the 60s. So this was one of the early examples for why you needed
inheritance and you needed runtime polymorphism because you wanted to handle this set of vehicles
in a manageable way. You can't just rewrite your code each time a new kind of vehicle comes along.
Yeah, that's a beautiful, powerful idea. And of course, it stretches through your work,
who C++ as we'll talk about. But I think you structured nicely what other breakthroughs came
along in the history of programming languages. If we were to tell the history in that way.
Obviously, I'm better telling the part of the history that that is the path I'm on,
as opposed to all the paths. Yeah, you skipped the hippie John McCarthy and Lisp,
one of my favorite languages. But Lisp is not one of my favorite languages. It's obviously
important. It's obviously interesting. Lots of people write code in it. And then they rewrite it
into CSE plus plus when they want to go to production. It's in the world I'm at, which are
constrained by performance, reliability, issues, deployability, cost of hardware.
I don't like things to be too dynamic. It is really hard to write a piece of code that's
perfectly flexible, that you can also deploy on a small computer. And that you can also put in,
say, a telephone switch in Bogota. What's the chance if you get an error and you find yourself
in the debugger that the telephone switch in Bogota on late Sunday night has a programmer around?
The chance is zero. And so a lot of things I think most about can't afford that flexibility.
I'm quite aware that maybe 70, 80% of all code are not under the kind of constraints I'm interested
in. But somebody has to do the job I'm doing, because you have to get from these high-level
flexible languages to the hardware. The stuff that lasts for 10, 20, 30 years is robust,
operates under very constrained conditions. Yes, absolutely. And it's fascinating and beautiful
in its own way. C++ is one of my favorite languages. And so is Lisp. So I can embody too
for different reasons as a programmer. I understand why Lisp is popular. And I can see
the beauty of the ideas and similarly with Smalltalk. It's just not as relevant in my world.
And by the way, I distinguish between those in the functional languages,
where I go to things like ML and Haskell. Different kind of languages. They have a
different kind of beauty and they're very interesting. And I actually try to learn from
all the languages I encounter to see what is there that would make
working on the kind of problems I'm interested in with the kind of constraints
that I'm interested in. What can actually be done better? Because we can surely do better than we
do today. You've said that it's good for any professional programmer to know at least five
languages, speaking about a variety of languages that you've taken inspiration from. And you've
listed yours as being, at least at the time, C++, obviously, Java, Python, Ruby and JavaScript.
Can you, first of all, update that list, modify it? You don't have to be constrained
to just five. But can you describe what you picked up also from each of these languages,
how you see them as inspirations for even when you're working with C++?
This is a very hard question to answer. So about languages, you should know languages.
I reckon I knew about 25 or thereabouts when I did C++. It was easier in those days
because the languages were smaller and you didn't have to learn a whole programming environment
and such to do it. You could learn the language quite easily. And it's good to learn so many
languages. And I imagine, just like with natural language for communication,
there's different paradigms that emerge in all of them, that there's commonalities and so on.
So I picked five out of a hat. The important thing that the number is not one.
If you're a monoglot, you are likely to think that your own culture is the only one's
period for everybody else's. A good learning of a foreign language and a foreign culture
is important. It helps you think and be a better person. With programming languages,
you become a better programmer, a better designer with the second language. Now,
once you've got two, the way to five is not that long. It's the second one that's most important.
And then when I had to pick five, I thought of thinking what kinds of languages are there.
Well, there's a really low-level stuff. It's actually good to know machine code.
Even still, sorry to interrupt. Even today.
The C++ optimizer is right better machine code than I do.
But I don't think I could appreciate them if I actually didn't understand machine code
and machine architecture. At least in my position, I have to understand a bit of it,
because you mess up the cache and you're off in performance by a factor of 100.
It shouldn't be that if you're interested in either performance or the size of the computer
you have to deploy. So I would go, that's a simpler. I used to mention C, but these days
going low-level is not actually what gives you the performance. It is to express your ideas
so cleanly that you can think about it and the optimizer can understand what you're up to.
My favorite way of optimizing these days is to throw out the clever bits and see if it still
runs fast and sometimes it runs faster. So I need the abstraction mechanisms or something like C++
to write compact high-performance code. There was a beautiful keynote by Jason Turner at the CPP
Con a couple of years ago where he decided he was going to program Pong on Motorola 6800, I think it
was. And he says, well, this is relevant because it looks like a microcontroller. It has specialized
hardware, it has not very much memory and it's relatively slow. And so he shows in real time
how he writes Pong, starting with fairly straightforward low-level stuff, improving
his subscriptions and what he's doing, he's writing C++ and it translates into 86 assembler,
which you can do with Clang and you can see it in real time. It's the Compiler Explorer,
which you can use on the web. And then he wrote a little program that translated 86 assembler into
Motorola assembler. And so he types and you can see this thing in real time. You can see it in real
time and even if you can't read the assembly code, you can just see it, his code gets better,
the code, the assembler gets smaller, he increases the abstraction level, uses C++ 11 as it were
better. This code gets cleaner, it gets easier maintained when the code shrinks and it keeps
shrinking. And I could not, in any reasonable amount of time, write that assembler as good
as the compiler generated from really quite nice modern C++. And I'll go as far as to say that
the thing that looked like C was significantly uglier and smaller when it became, and larger
when it became machine code. So the abstractions that can be optimized are important.
I would love to see that kind of visualization in larger code bases. That might be beautiful.
But you can't show a larger code base in a one-hour talk and have it fit on screen.
So that's C and C++. So my two languages would be machine code and C++. And then I think you can
learn a lot from the functional languages. So PIG has Gloloy ML. I don't care which. I think,
actually, you learn the same lessons of expressing especially mathematical notions really clearly
and having a type system that's really strict. And then you should probably have a language for
sort of quickly churning out something. You could pick JavaScript, you could pick Python,
you could pick Ruby. What do you make of JavaScript in general? So you kind of,
you're talking in the platonic sense about languages, about what they're good at,
what their philosophy of design is. But there's also a large user base behind
each of these languages. And they use it in the way sometimes maybe it wasn't really designed for.
That's right.
JavaScript is used way beyond probably what it was designed for.
Let me say it this way. When you build a tool, you do not know how it's going to be used.
You try to improve the tool by looking at how it's being used and when people cut their fingers
off and try and stop that from happening. But really, you have no control over how
something is used. So I'm very happy and proud of some of the things C++ is being used at.
And some of the things I wish people wouldn't do, Bitcoin mining being my favorite example,
uses as much energy as Switzerland and mostly serves criminals.
Yeah.
But back to the languages, I actually think that having JavaScript run in the browser
wasn't an enabling thing for a lot of things. Yes, you could have done it better,
but people were trying to do it better and they were using
sort of more principles, language designs, but they just couldn't do it right. And the
non-professional programmers that write lots of that code just couldn't understand them. So
it did an amazing job for what it was. It's not the previous language and I don't think it ever
will be the previous language, but let's not be bigots here.
So what was the origin story of C++?
Yeah.
So you basically gave a few perspectives of your inspiration of object-oriented programming
that you had a connection with C++ and performance efficiency was an important
a thing you were drawn to.
Efficiency and reliability.
Reliability.
You have to get both.
What's reliability?
I really want my telephone calls to get through and I want the quality of what I am talking
coming out at the other end. The other end might be in London or wherever.
So and you don't want the system to be crashing. If you're doing a bank, you must
crash. It might be your bank account that is in trouble. There's different constraints like
games. It doesn't matter too much if there's a crash, nobody dies and nobody gets ruined.
But I'm interested in the combination of performance partly because of sort of speed
of things being done. Part of being able to do things that is necessary to have reliability
of larger systems. If you spend all your time interpreting a symbol function call,
you are not going to have enough time to do proper signal processing to get the
telephone calls to sound right. Either that or you have to have 10 times as many computers
and you can't afford your phone anymore. It's a ridiculous idea in the modern world because
we've solved all of those problems. I mean they keep popping up in different ways
because we tackle bigger and bigger problems so efficiency remains always an important aspect.
But you have to think about efficiency not just as speed but as an enabler to important things
and one of the things it enables is reliability, is dependability. When I press the pedal,
the brake pedal of a car, it does not actually connect it directly to anything but a computer.
That computer better work. Let's talk about reliability just a little bit.
So modern cars have ECUs, have millions of lines of code today. So this is certainly
especially true of autonomous vehicles where some of the aspect of the control or driver
assistance systems that steer the car, they keep it in the lane and so on.
So how do you think, I talked to regulators, people in government who are very nervous about
testing the safety of these systems of software, ultimately software that makes decisions that
could lead to fatalities. So how do we test software systems like these?
First of all, safety, like performance and like security is a systems property. People tend to
look at one part of a system at a time and saying something like, this is secure. That's all right.
I don't need to do that. Yeah, that piece of code is secure. I'll buy you an operator.
I'll buy you an operator. If you want to have reliability, if you want to have performance,
if you want to have security, you have to look at the whole system.
I did not expect you to say that, but that's very true. Yes.
I'm dealing with one part of the system and I want my part to be really good,
but I know it's not the whole system. Furthermore, making an individual part perfect
may actually not be the best way of getting the highest degree of reliability and performance and
such. There's people who say C++ type safe, not type safe. You can break it. Sure. I can break
anything that runs on a computer. I may not go through your type system. If I wanted to break
into your computer, I'll probably try SQL injection. It's very true. If you think about
safety or even reliability at its system level, especially when a human being is involved,
it starts becoming hopeless pretty quickly in terms of proving that something is
safe to a certain level because there's so many variables. It's so complex.
Well, let's get back to something we can talk about and actually make some progress on.
We can look at C++ programs and we can try and make sure they crash less often.
The way you do that is largely by simplification. The first step is to simplify the code, have less
code, have code that are less likely to go wrong. It's not by runtime testing everything.
It is not by big test frameworks that you're using. Yes, we do that also. But the first step
is actually to make sure that when you want to express something, you can express it directly in
code rather than going through endless loops and convolutions in your head before it gets down the
code. If the way you're thinking about a problem is not in the code, there is a missing piece
that's just in your head. The code, you can see what it does, but it cannot see what you thought
about it unless you have expressed things directly. When you express things directly,
you can maintain it. It's easier to find errors. It's easier to make modifications. It's actually
easier to test it and, lo and behold, it runs faster. Therefore, you can use a smaller number
of computers, which means there's less hardware that could possibly break. I think the key here
is simplification, but it has to be to use the Einstein quote as simple as possible and no
simpler. Not simpler. There are other areas with under constraints where you can be simpler than
you can be in C++, but in the domain I'm dealing with, that's the simplification I'm after.
So how do you inspire or ensure that the Einstein level of simplification is reached?
So can you do code review? Can you look at code? If I gave you the code for the Ford F-150
and said, here, is this a mess or is this okay? Is it possible to tell? Is it possible to regulate?
An experienced developer can look at code and see if it smells. I mixed it for us deliberately.
The point is that it is hard to generate something that is really obviously clean and
can be appreciated, but you can usually recognize when you haven't reached that point.
And so if I have never looked at the F-150 code, so I wouldn't know, but I know what I would be
looking for. There I'll be looking for some tricks that correlate with bugs and elsewhere, and
I have tried to formulate rules for what good code looks like, and the current version of that is
called the C++ Core Guidelines. One thing people should remember is there's what you can do in a
language and what you should do. In a language you have lots of things that is necessary in some
context, but not in others. There's things that exist just because there's 30-year-old code out
there and you can't get rid of it, but you can't have rules that says when you create it, try and
follow these rules. This does not create good programs by themselves, but it limits the damage
for mistakes. It limits the possibilities of mistakes, and basically we are trying to say
what is it that a good programmer does at the fairly simple level of where you use the language
and how you use it. Now I can put all the rules for chiseling in marble. It doesn't mean that somebody
who follows all of those rules can do a masterpiece by Michelangelo. That is, there's something else
to write a good program. Is there something else to create important work of art?
There's some kind of inspiration, understanding, gift, but we can approach the
technical, the craftsmanship level of it. The famous painters, the famous sculptures,
was among other things superb craftsmen. They could express their ideas using their tools very well,
and so these days I think what I'm doing, what a lot of people are doing, we're still trying to
figure out how it is to use our tools very well. For a really good piece of code, you need a spark
of inspiration, and you can't, I think, regulate that. You cannot say that I'll buy your picture
only if you're at least Van Gogh. There are other things you can regulate, but not the inspiration.
I think that's quite beautifully put. It is true that there is an experienced programmer when you
see code that's inspired, that's like Michelangelo, you know it when you see it, and the opposite
of that is code that is messy, code that smells, you know when you see it, and I'm not sure you
can describe it in words except vaguely through guidelines and so on. Yes, it's easier to recognize
ugly than to recognize beauty in code, and for the reason is that sometimes beauty comes from
something that's innovative and unusual, and you have to sometimes think reasonably hard to appreciate
that. On the other hand, the messes have things in common, and you can have static checkers and
dynamic checkers that finds a large number of the most common mistakes. You can catch a lot of
sloppiness mechanically. I'm a great fan of static analysis in particular, because you can check for
not just the language rules, but for the usage of language rules, and I think we will see much
more static analysis in the coming decade. Can you describe what static analysis is? You
represent a piece of code so that you can write a program that goes over that representation
and look for things that are right and not right. So for instance, you can analyze a program to see
if resources are leaked. That's one of my favorite problems. It's not actually all that hard in
modern C++, but you can do it. If you are writing in the C level, you have to have a malloc and a
free, and they have to match. If you have them in a single function, you can usually do it very
easily. If there's a malloc here, there should be a free there. On the other hand, in between can be
drawing complete code, and then it becomes impossible. If you pass that pointer to the memory
out of a function and then want to make sure that the free is done somewhere else, now it gets
really difficult. And so for static analysis, you can run through a program and you can try and figure
out if there's any leaks. And what you will probably find is that you will find some leaks,
and you will find quite a few places where your analysis can't be complete. It might depend on
runtime. It might depend on the cleverness of your analyzer, and it might take a long time. Some of
these programs run for a long time. But if you combine such analysis with a set of rules such
as how people could use it, you can actually see why the rules are violated, and that stops you from
getting into the impossible complexities. You don't want to solve the holding problem.
So static analysis is looking at the code without running the code?
Yes. And thereby, it's almost not a production code, but it's almost like an education tool
of how the language should be used. It guides you. At its best, it would guide you in how you
write future code as well, and you learn together.
Yes. So basically, you need a set of rules for how you use the language. Then you need a static
analysis that catches your mistakes when you violate the rules or when your code ends up
doing things that it shouldn't, despite the rules, because there is the language rules. We can go
further. And again, it's back to my idea that I would much rather find errors before I start
running the code. If nothing else, once the code runs, if it catches an error at run times, I have
to have an error handler. And one of the hardest things to write in code is error handling code,
because you know something went wrong. Do you know really exactly what went wrong?
Usually not. How can you recover when you don't know what the problem was?
You can't be 100 percent sure what the problem was in many, many cases. And this is part of it.
So yes, we need good languages with good type systems. We need rules for how to use them.
We need static analysis. And the ultimate for static analysis is, of course, program proof,
but that still doesn't scale to the kind of systems we deploy. Then we start needing testing and
the rest of the stuff. So C++ is an object-oriented programming language that creates, especially
with its newer versions, as we'll talk about, higher and higher levels of abstraction. So
how do you design? Let's even go back to the origin of C++. How do you design something with
so much abstraction that's still efficient and is still something that you can manage,
do static analysis on, you can have constraints on, they can be reliable, all those things we've
talked about. So to me, there's a slight tension between high level abstraction and efficiency.
That's a good question. I could probably have a year's course just trying to answer it.
Yes, there's a tension between efficiency and abstraction, but you also get the interesting
situation that you get the best efficiency out of the best abstraction. And my main tool for
efficiency for performance actually is abstraction. So let's go back to how C++ got there.
You said it was object-oriented programming language. I actually never said that.
It's always quoted, but I never did. I said C++ supports object-oriented programming
but it's not. And other techniques. And that's important because I think that the
best solution to most complex interesting problems require ideas and techniques from things that
has been called object-oriented data abstraction, function or traditional C-style code, all of the
above. And so when I was designing C++, I soon realized I couldn't just add features.
If you just add what looks pretty or what people ask for or what you think is good,
one by one, you're not going to get a coherent whole. What you need is a set of guidelines that
that guides your decisions. Should this feature be in or should this feature be out? How should a
feature be modified before it can go in and such? And in the book I wrote about that,
the design evolution of C++, there's a whole bunch of rules like that. Most of them are not
language technical. They are things like don't violate static type system because I like static
type system for the obvious reason that I like things to be reliable on reasonable amounts of
hardware. But one of these rules is the zero overhead principle. The zero overhead principle.
It basically says that if you have an abstraction, it should not cost anything compared to write
the equivalent code at a lower level. So if I have, say, a matrix multiply,
it should be written in such a way that you could not drop to the C level of abstraction and
use arrays and pointers and such and run faster. And so people have written such
matrix multiplications. And they've actually gotten code that ran faster than FORTRAN because
once you had the right abstraction, you can eliminate, you can eliminate temporaries and you
can do loop fusion and other good stuff like that. That's quite hard to do by hand and in a lower
level language. And there's some really nice examples of that. And the key here is that that
matrix multiplication, the matrix abstraction allows you to write code that's simple and easy.
You can do that in any language. But with C++, it has the features so that you can also have
this thing run faster than if you hand coded it. Now, people have given that lecture many times,
I and others, and a very common question after the talk where you have demonstrated that you're
going to outperform FORTRAN for dense matrix multiplication, people come up and says, yeah,
but there was C++. If I rewrote your code and see how much faster would it run? The answer is much
slower. This happened the first time actually back in the ages with a friend of mine called
Doug McElroy who demonstrated exactly this effect. And so the principle is you should
give programmers the tools so that the abstractions can follow the zero word principle.
Furthermore, when you put in a language feature on C++ or a standard library feature,
you try to meet this. It doesn't mean it's absolutely optimal, but it means if you hand
code it with the usual facilities in the language in C++ in C, you should not be able to better it.
Usually, you can do better if you use embedded assembler for machine code for some of the
details to utilize part of a computer that the compiler doesn't know about,
but you should get to that point before you beat the abstraction.
So that's a beautiful ideal to reach for. And we meet it quite often.
So where's the magic of that coming from? There's some of it is the compilation process. So the
implementation is C++. Some of it is the design of the feature itself, the guidelines. So I've
recently and often talked to Chris Ladner, so Clang. Just out of curiosity, is your
relationship in general with the different implementations of C++, as you think about
you and committee and other people in C++, think about the design of new features or design of
previous features in trying to reach the ideal of zero overhead? Does the magic come from the design,
the guidelines, or from the implementations? And not all. You go for programming technique,
program language features, and implementation techniques. You need all three.
And how can you think about all three at the same time?
It takes some experience, takes some practice, and sometimes you get it wrong. But after a while,
you sort of get it right. I don't write compilers anymore. But
Brian Kernighan pointed out that one of the reasons C++ succeeded was some of the craftsmanship I put
into the early compilers. And of course, I did the language design. Of course, I wrote a fair
amount of code using this kind of stuff. And I think most of the successes involves progress in
all three areas together. A small group of people can do that. Two, three people can work together
to do something like that. It's ideal if it's one person that has all the skills necessary.
But nobody has all the skills necessary in all the fields where C++ is used. So if you want to
approach my ideal in, say, concurrent programming, you need to know about algorithms of concurrent
programming. You need to know the the trigger of lock free programming. You need to know something
about the compiler techniques. And then you have to know some of the program areas, sorry,
the application areas where this is, like some forms of graphics or some forms of
what we call a web serving kind of stuff. And that's very hard to get into a single head.
But small groups can do it too. So is there differences in your view?
Not saying which is better or so on, but difference in the different implementations
of C++? Why are there several sort of maybe naive questions for me?
This is a very reasonable question. When I designed C++,
most languages have multiple implementations. Because if you run on an IBM, if you run on a
Sun, if you run on a Motorola, there was just many, many companies and they each have their
own compilation structure, the old compilers, it was just fairly common that there was many of them.
And I wrote C front, assuming that other people would write compilers with C++,
if successful. And furthermore, I wanted to utilize all the back end infrastructures that
were available. I soon realized that my users were using 25 different linkers. I couldn't
write my own linker. Yes, I could, but I couldn't write 25 linkers and also get any work done on
the language. And so it came from a world where there was many linkers, many optimizers, many
compiler front ends, not to start, but many operating systems. The whole world was not an
86 and Linux box or something, whatever is the standard today. In the old days, they said a
Vax. So basically, I assumed there would be lots of compilers. It was not a decision that there
should be many compilers. It was just a fact. That's the way the world is. And yes, many compilers
emerged. And today, there's at least four front ends, Clang, GCC, Microsoft, and
EDG. It is the same group. They supply a lot of the independent organizations and the embedded
systems industry. And there's lots and lots of back ends. We have to think about how many
dozen back ends there are, because different machines have different things, especially in the
embedded world, the machines are very different. The architectures are very different. And so
having a single implementation was never an option. Now, I also happen to dislike monocultures.
Monocultures.
They are dangerous, because whoever owns the monoculture can go stale and there's no competition
and there's no incentive to innovate. There's a lot of incentive to put barriers in the way of
change, because, hey, we own the world and it's a very comfortable world for us. And who are you to
mess with that? So I really am very happy that there's four front ends for C++. Clang's great,
but GCC was great. But then it got somewhat stale. Clang came along and GCC is much better now.
Competition is good.
Microsoft is much better now. So at least a low number of front end puts a lot of pressure on
standards compliance and also on performance and error messages and compile time speed,
all this good stuff that we want.
Do you think, crazy question, there might come along, do you hope there might come along
implementation of C++ written given all of its history written from scratch,
so written today from scratch?
Well, Clang and the LLVM is more or less written from scratch.
But there's been C++ 11, 14, 17, 20, there's been a lot of features.
Sooner or later, somebody is going to try again. There has been attempts to write new C++
compilers and some of them has been used and some of them has been absorbed into others and such.
Yeah, it'll happen.
So what are the key features of C++? And let's use that as a way to sort of talk about
the evolution of C++, the new feature. So at the highest level, what are the features that were
there in the beginning? What features got added?
Let's first get a principle or an aim in place. C++ is for people who want to use hardware really
well and then manage the complexity of doing that through abstraction.
And so the first facility you have is a way of manipulating the machines at a fairly low level.
That looks very much like C. It has loops, it has variables, it has pointers like machine
addresses, it can access memory directly, it can allocate stuff in the absolute minimum of space
needed on the machine. There's a machine facing part of C++, which is roughly equivalent to C.
I said C++ could beat C and it can. It doesn't mean I dislike C. If I disliked C, I wouldn't have
built on it. Furthermore, after Dennis Ritchie, I'm probably the major contributor to modern C.
And well, I had lunch with Dennis most days for 16 years and we never had a harsh word between us.
So these C versus C++ fights are for people who don't quite understand what's going on.
And then the other part is the abstraction. And there the key is the class, which is a user-defined
type. And my idea for the class is that you should be able to build a type that's just like the
built-in types in the way you use them, in the way you declare them, in the way you get the
memory, and you can do just as well. So in C++, there's an int. As in C, you should be able to
build an abstraction, a class, which we can call capital int, that you can use exactly like an
integer and run just as fast as an integer. There's the idea right there. And of course,
you probably don't want to use the int itself, but it has happened. People have wanted integers
that were range checked so that you couldn't overflow and such, especially for very safety
critical applications like the fuel injection for a marine diesel engine for the largest ships.
This is a real example, by the way. This has been done. They built themselves an integer
that was just like integer, except that it couldn't overflow. If there was an overflow,
you went into the error handling. And then you built more interesting types. You can build a
matrix, which you need to do graphics, or you could build a gnome for a video game.
And all of these are classes, and they appear just like the built-in types in terms of efficiency
and so on. So what else is there? And flexibility. I don't know. For people who are not familiar with
object-oriented programming, there's inheritance. There's a hierarchy of classes. Just like you
said, create a generic vehicle that can turn left. What people found was that you don't actually
know. How do I say this? A lot of types are related. That is, the vehicles, all vehicles are
related. Bicycles, cars, fire engines, tanks. They have some things in common and some things
that differ. And you would like to have the common things common and having the differences
specific. And when you didn't want to know about the differences, like just turn left,
you don't have to worry about it. That's how you get the traditional object-oriented
programming coming out of Cmula adopted by Smalltalk and C++ and all the other languages.
The other kind of obvious similarity between types comes when you have something like a vector.
Fortran gave us a vector called array of doubles. But the minute you have a vector of
doubles, you want a vector of double precision doubles and for short doubles, for graphics,
and why should you not have a vector of integers while you're at it? Or a vector of
vectors and a vector of vectors of chess pieces. Now we have a board, right? So this is, you express
the commonality as the idea of a vector and the variations come through parameterization.
And so here we get the two fundamental ways of abstracting, of having similarities of
types in C++. There's the inheritance and there's a parameterization. There's the object-oriented
programming and there's the generic programming. With the templates for the generic programming.
Yep. So you've presented it very nicely, but now you have to make all that happen and make it
efficient. So generic programming with templates, there's all kinds of magic going on, especially
recently, that you can help catch up on. But it feels to me like you can do way more than what
you just said with templates. You can start doing this kind of metaprogramming, this kind of...
You can do metaprogramming also. I didn't go there in that explanation. We're trying to be very
basics, but go back on to the implementation. If you couldn't implement this efficiently,
if you couldn't use it so that it became efficient, it has no place in C++ because it
will violate the zero overhead principle. So when I had to get object-oriented programming
inheritance, I took the idea of virtual functions from Simula. Virtual functions is a Simula term,
class is a Simula term. If you ever use those words, say thanks to Christian Nügel and Olio
Handahl. And I get the simplest implementation I knew of, which was basically a jump table.
So you get the virtual function table, the function goes in, do it, does an interaction
through a table and get the right function. That's how you pick the right thing there.
And I thought that was trivial. It's close to optimal. And it was obvious. It turned out the
Simula had a more complicated way of doing it and therefore slower. And it turns out that most
languages have something that's a little bit more complicated, sometimes more flexible,
but you pay for it. And one of the strengths of C++ was that you could actually do this
object-oriented stuff. And your overhead compared to ordinary functions, there's no
indirection, it's sort of in 5, 10, 25 percent of just the core. It's down there. It's not two.
And that means you can afford to use it. Furthermore, in C++, you have the distinction
between a virtual function and a non-virtual function. If you don't want any overhead,
if you don't need the interaction that gives you the flexibility in object-oriented programming,
just don't ask for it. So the idea is that you only use virtual functions if you actually need
the flexibility. So it's not zero overhead, but it's zero overhead compared to any other
way of achieving the flexibility. Now, or to parameterization. Basically, the compiler looks at
at the template, say the vector, and it looks at the parameter and then combines the two and
generates a piece of code that is exactly as if you're ridden a vector of that specific type.
So that's the minimal overhead. If you have many template parameters, you can actually
combine code that the compiler couldn't usually see at the same time, and therefore get code
that is faster than if you had handwritten the stuff, unless you were very, very clever.
So the thing is parameterized code, the compiler fills stuff in during the compilation process,
not during runtime. That's right. And furthermore, it gives all the information it's gotten,
which is the template, the parameter, and the context of use. It combines the three and generates
good code. But it can generate. Now, it's a little outside of what I'm even comfortable
thinking about, but it can generate a lot of code. Yes. And how do you, I remember
being both amazed at the power of that idea and how ugly the debugging looked.
Yes. Debugging can be truly horrid. Come back to this because I have a solution. Anyway,
the debugging was ugly. The code generated by C++ has always been ugly because there's these
inherent optimizations. A modern C++ compiler has front-end, middle-end, and back-end optimizations.
Even Cfront, back in 83, had front-end and back-end optimizations. I actually took the code,
generated an internal representation, munched that representation to generate good code.
So people say it's not a compiler, it generates C. The reason it generated C was I wanted to use
a C's code generators that was really good at back-end optimizations. But I needed front-end
optimizations. And therefore, the C I generated was optimized C. The way a really good handcrafted
optimizer human could generate it, and it was not meant for humans. It was the output of a program,
and it's much worse today. And with templates, it gets much worse still. So it's hard to combine
simple debugging with the optimal code, because the idea is to drag in information from different
parts of the code to generate machine code. And that's not readable. So what people often do
for debugging is they turn the optimizer off. And so you get code that when something in your
source code looks like a function core, it is a function core. When the optimizer is turned on,
it may disappear, the function core. It may inline. And so one of the things you can do
is you can actually get code that is smaller than the function core because you eliminate the
function preamble and return. And that's just the operation there. One of the key things when I did
templates was I wanted to make sure that if you have, say, a sort algorithm and you give it a
sorting criteria, if that sorting criteria is simply comparing things with less than,
the code generated should be the less than, not a indirect function core to a comparison
object, which is what it is in the source code. But we really want down to the single instruction.
And, but anyway, turn off the optimizer and you can debug. The first level of debugging
can be done and I always do without the optimization on because then I can see what's going on.
And then there's this idea of concepts that put some, now I've never even,
I don't know if it was ever available in any form, but it puts some constraints on the stuff
you can parameterize, essentially. Let me try and explain this. So yes, it wasn't there
10 years ago. We have had versions of it that actually work for the last four or five years.
It was a design by Gaby does raise at true sort and me, we were professors and postdocs in Texas
at the time. And the implementation by interest sort and has been available for that time.
And it is part of C plus plus 20. And this standard library that uses it. So this is
becoming really very real. It's available in Klangen and GCC, GCC for a couple of years.
And I believe Microsoft is soon going to do it expect all of C plus plus 20 to be available.
So in all the major compilers in 20. But this kind of stuff is available now. I'm just saying
that because otherwise people might think I was talking about science fiction. And so what I'm going
to say is concrete, you can write it today. And there's production uses of it. So the basic idea
is that when you have a generic component, like a sort function, the sort function will require
at least two parameters, one, a data structure with a given type and a comparison criteria.
And these things are related, but obviously you can't compare things if you don't know what the
type of things you compare. And so you want to be able to say, I'm going to sort something and it
is to be sortable. What does it mean to be sortable? You look it up in the standard, it has to have a
it has to be a sequence with a beginning and an end. There has to be random access to that sequence.
And there has to be the element types has to be comparable.
Which means less than operator can operate on. Yes.
Loss of logical operator can operate. Basically what concepts are their compile time predicates,
their predicates you can ask, are you a sequence? Yes, I have a beginning and end.
Are you a random access sequence? Yes, I have a subscripting and plus.
Is your element type something that has a less than? Yes, I have a less than it's and
so basically that's the system. And so instead of saying, I will take a parameter of any type,
it'll say I'll take something that's sortable. And it's well defined. And so we say, okay,
you can sort with less than I don't want less than I want greater than or something I invent.
So you have two parameters, the sortable thing and the
comparison criteria. And the comparison criteria will say, well, I can,
you can write in saying it should operate on the element type.
And it has the comparison operations. So that's just simply the fundamental thing.
It's compile time predicates. Do you have the properties I need? So it specifies the requirements
of the code on the parameters that it gets. It's very similar to types, actually.
But operating in the space of concepts. The word concept was used by Alex Stefanov,
who is sort of the father of generic programming in the context of C++.
You know, there's other places that use that word, but the way we call generic programming is
Alex's. And he called them concepts, because he said they're the sort of the fundamental
concepts of an area. So they should be called concepts. And we've had concepts all the time.
If you look at the K&R book about C, C has arithmetic types, and it has
integral types. It says so in the book. And then it lists what they are, and they have
certain properties. The difference today is that we can actually write a concept that will ask a
type, are you an integral type? Do you have the properties necessary to be an integral type?
Do you have plus, minus, divide, and such? So maybe the story of concepts,
because I thought it might be part of C++11, C0x, whatever it was at the time.
We'll talk a little bit about this fascinating process of standards, because I think it's
really interesting for people. It's interesting for me. But why did it take so long? What shapes
did the idea of concepts take? What were the challenges? Back in 1987 or thereabouts? 1987?
Well, 1987 or thereabouts. When I was designing templates, obviously, I wanted to express the
notion of what is required by a template of its arguments. And so I looked at this.
And basically, for templates, I wanted three properties. I wanted to be very flexible.
It had to be able to express things I couldn't imagine, because I know I can't imagine everything,
and I've been suffering from languages that try to constrain you to only do what the designer
thought good. I didn't want to do that. Secondly, it had to run as fast or faster than hand-written
code. So basically, if I have a vector of t and I take a vector of char, it should run as fast as
you build a vector of char yourself without parameterization. And thirdly, I wanted to be
able to express the constraints of the arguments, have proper type checking of the interfaces,
and neither I nor anybody else at the time knew how to get all three. And I thought for C++,
I must have the two first. Otherwise, it's not C++. And it bothered me for another couple of decades
that I couldn't solve the third one. I mean, I was the one that put function argument type checking
into C. I know the value of good interfaces. I didn't invent that idea. It's very common,
but I did it. And I wanted to do the same for templates, of course, and I couldn't. So it bothered
me. Then we tried again, 2002, 2003. Gaby just raised and I started analyzing the problem,
explained possible solutions. It was not a complete design. A group in University of Indiana,
an old friend of mine, they started a project at Indiana and
we thought we could get a good system of concepts in another two or three years.
That would have made C++ 11 to C++ 06 or 07. Well, it turned out that I think we got a lot
of the fundamental ideas wrong. They were too conventional. They didn't quite fit C++, in my
opinion. Didn't serve implicit conversions very well. It didn't serve mixed type arithmetic,
mixed type computations very well. A lot of stuff came out of the functional
community. That community didn't deal with multiple types in the same way as C++ does,
had more constraints on what you could express, and didn't have the draconian
performance requirements. Basically, we tried. We tried very hard. We had some successes,
but it just in the end wasn't. Didn't compile fast enough, was too hard to use,
and didn't run fast enough unless you had optimizers that was beyond the state of the art.
They still are. We had to do something else. Basically, it was the idea that a set of parameters
has defined a set of operations, and you go through an interaction table just like for
virtual functions, and then you try to optimize the interaction away to get performance.
We just couldn't do all of that. Get back to the standardization. We are standardizing C++
under ISO rules, which are very open process. People come in. There's no requirements for
education or experience. You've started to develop C++. When was the first standard
established? What is that like, the ISO standard? Is there a committee that you're referring to?
Sure. There's a group of people. What's that like? How often do you meet? What's the discussion?
I'll try and explain that. Sometime in early 1989, two people, one from IBM, one from HP,
turned up in my office and told me I would like to standardize C++.
This was a new idea to me. I pointed out that it wasn't finished yet, and it wasn't ready for
formal standardization and such. They said, no, Brianna, you haven't gotten it. You really want to
do this. Our organizations depend on C++. We cannot depend on something that's owned by
another corporation that might be a competitor. Of course, we could rely on you, but you might
get run over by a boss. We really need to get this out in the open. It has to be
standardized under formal rules. We are going to standardize it under ISO rules,
and you really want to be part of it because, basically, otherwise, we'll do it ourselves.
We know you can do it better. Through a combination of arm twisting and flattery,
it got started. In late
in late 89, there was a meeting in DC at the, actually, no, it was not ISO,
then it was ANSI, the American National Standard we're doing.
We met there. We were lectured on the rules of how to do an ANSI standard.
There was about 25 of us there, which apparently was a new record for that kind of meeting.
Some of the old C guys that has been standardized in C was there, so we got some expertise in.
The way this works is that it's an open process. Anybody can sign up if they pay the
minimal fee, which is about $1,000. It's a little bit more now. I think it's $1,280.
It's not going to kill you. We have three meetings a year. This is fairly standard.
We tried two meetings a year for a couple of years that didn't work too well. Three one-week
meetings a year. You meet and you have technical meetings, technical discussions,
and then you bring proposals forward for votes. The votes are done one person per
one vote per organization, so you can't have, say, IBM come in with 10 people and
dominate things that's not allowed. These are organizations that extents to the
UC++ or individuals. It's a bunch of people in the room deciding the design of a language
based on which a lot of the world's systems run. Right. Well, I think most people would agree it's
better than if I decided it, or better than if a single organization like AG&C decided it.
I don't know if everyone agrees to that, by the way. Bureaucracies have their critics too.
Yes. Look, standardization is not pleasant. It's horrifying.
It's like democracy.
But we, exactly. As Churchill says, democracy is the worst way except for the others.
And it's about, say, the same performance standardization.
But anyway, so we meet and we have these votes and that determines what the standard is.
Couple of years later, we extended this so it became worldwide. We have standard organizations
that are active in currently 15 to 20 countries and another 15 to 20 are sort of looking and voting
based on the rest of the work on it. And we meet three times a year. Next week, I'll be in Cologne,
Germany, spending a week doing standardization. And then we will vote out the committee draft
or C++20, which goes to the national standards committees for comments and requests for changes
and improvements. Then we do that. And there's a second set of votes where hopefully everybody
votes in favor. This has happened several times. The first time we finished, we started in the
first technical meeting was in 1990. The last was in 98. We voted it out. That was the standard
that people used till 11 or a little bit past 11. And it was an international standard.
All the countries voted in favor. It took longer with 11. I'll mention why, but all the
nations voted in favor. And we work on the basis of consensus. That is, we do not want something
that passes 60-40, because then we're getting dialects and opponents and people complain too
much. They all complain too much. But basically, it has no real effect. The standards have been
obeyed. They have been working to make it easier to use many compilers, many computers, and all
of that kind of stuff. And so the first, it was traditional with ISO standards to take 10 years.
We did the first one in eight, brilliant. And we thought we were going to do the next one in six,
because now we're good at it. It took 13. Yeah, it was named OX. It was named OX.
Hoping that you would at least get it within the single, within the odds, the single digits.
I thought we would get, I thought we would get six, seven, or eight.
The confidence of youth. That's right. Well, the point is that this was sort of like a second
system effect. That is, we now knew how to do it. And so we're going to do it much better.
And we've got more ambitious. And it took longer. Furthermore, there is this tendency,
because it's a 10-year cycle, or age, doesn't matter. Just before you're about to ship,
somebody has a bright idea. And so we really, really must get that in.
We did that successfully with the STL. We got the standard library that gives us all the STL
stuff. That basically, I think it saved C++. It was beautiful. And then people tried it with other
things. And it didn't work so well. They got things in, but it wasn't as dramatic. And it took
longer and longer and longer. So after C++ 11, which was a huge improvement, and what basically
what most people are using today, we decided never again. And so how do you avoid those slips?
And the answer is that you ship more often. So that if you have a slip on a 10-year cycle,
by the time you know it's a slip, there's 11 years till you get it. Now with a three-year cycle,
there is about four years till you get it. Like the delay between feature freeze and
shipping. So you always get one or two years more. And so we shipped 14 on time. We shipped
17 on time. And we will ship 20 on time. It'll happen. And furthermore, this
allows, this gives a predictability that allows the implementers, the compiler implementers,
the library implementers, they have a target and they deliver on it. 11 took two years before
most compilers were good enough. 14, most compilers were actually getting pretty good in 14.
17, everybody shipped in 17. We are going to have at least almost everybody ship,
almost everything in 20. And I know this because they're shipping in 19. Predictability is good,
delivery on time is good. And so, yeah. That's great. That's how it works.
There's a lot of features that came in in C++ 11. There's a lot of features at the birth of C++
that were amazing and ideas with concepts in 2020. What to you is the most,
just to you personally, beautiful or just do you sit back and think, wow, that's just nice
clean feature of C++? I have written two papers for the history of programming languages
conference, which basically asked me such questions. And I'm writing a third one, which I will
deliver at the history of programming languages conference in London next year. So I've been
thinking about that. And there is one clear answer, constructors and destructors. The way a
constructor can establish the environment for the use of a type for an object and the destructor
cleans up any messes at the end of it. That is the key to C++. That's why we don't have to use
garbage collection. That's how we can get predictable performance. That's how you can get
the minimal overhead in many, many cases and have really clean types. It's the idea of
constructor-destructor pairs. Sometimes it comes out under the name RII, resource acquisition is
initialization, which is the idea that you grab resources and the constructor and release them
in destructor. It's also the best example of why I shouldn't be in advertising. I get the best idea
and I call it resource acquisition is initialization. Not the greatest naming I've ever heard.
So it's types, abstraction of types. You said, I want to create my own types.
So types is an essential part of C++ and making them efficient is the key part.
And to you, this is almost getting philosophical, but the construction and the destruction,
the creation of an instance of a type and the freeing of resources from that
instance of a type is what defines the object. That's almost like birth and death is what
defines human life. Yeah, that's right. By the way, philosophy is important. You can't do
good language design without philosophy because what you are determining is what people can express
and how. This is very important. By the way, constructors, destructors came into C++ in 79
in about the second week of my work with what was then called C++. It is a fundamental idea.
Next comes the fact that you need to control copying because once you control, as you said,
birth and death, you have to control taking copies, which is another way of creating an object.
And finally, you have to be able to move things around so you get the move operations.
And that's the set of key operations you can define on a C++ type.
And so to you, those things are just a beautiful part of C++ that is at the core of it all.
Yes. You mentioned that you hope there will be one unified set of guidelines
in the future for how to construct the programming language. So perhaps not one programming language,
but a unification of how we build programming languages, if you remember such statements.
I have some trouble remembering it, but I know the origin of that idea.
So maybe you can talk about sort of C++ has been improving. There's been a lot of programming
language. Where does the archer history taking us? Do you hope that there is a unification about
the languages with which we communicate in the digital space?
Well, I think that languages should be designed not by clobbering language features together and
doing slightly different versions of somebody else's ideas, but through
the creation of a set of principles, rules of thumbs, whatever you call them.
I made them for C++ and we're trying to teach people in the Standards Committee about these
rules because a lot of people come in and say, I've got a great idea. Let's put it in the language.
And then you have to ask, why does it fit in the language? Why does it fit in this language?
It may fit in another language and not here or it may fit here and not the other language.
So you have to work from a set of principles and you have to develop that set of principles.
And one example that I sometimes remember is I was sitting down with some of the designers of
Common Lisp and we were talking about languages and language features and
obviously we didn't agree about anything because, well, Lisp is not C++ and vice versa.
It's too many parentheses.
But suddenly we started making progress. I said, I had this problem and I developed it
according to these ideas and they said, why? We had that problem, different problem,
and we developed it with the same kind of principles. And so we worked through
large chunks of C++ and large chunks of Common Lisp and figured out we actually had
similar sets of principles of how to do it. But the constraints on our designs were very
different and the aims for the usage was very different. But there was commonality
in the way you reason about language features and the fundamental principles you were trying to do.
So do you think that's possible to order? So just like there is perhaps a unified theory of
physics, of the fundamental forces of physics, I'm sure there is
commonalities among the languages, but there's also people involved that help
drive the development of these languages. Do you have a hope or an optimism that
there will be a unification if you think about physics in Einstein towards a simplified
language? Do you think that's possible?
So let's remember sort of modern physics, I think started with Galileo in the 1300s. So
they've had 700 years to get going. Modern computing started in about 49. We've got,
what is that, 70 years. They have 10 times. And furthermore, they're not as bothered with
people using physics the way we are worried about programming. It's done by humans. So
each have problems and constraints the others have, but we are very immature compared to physics.
So I would look at sort of the philosophical level and look for fundamental principles.
Like you don't leak resources, you shouldn't. You don't take errors at runtime that you don't
need to. You don't violate some kind of type system. There's many kinds of type systems,
but when you have one, you don't break it, et cetera, et cetera. There will be quite a few.
And it will not be the same for all languages. But I think if we step back at some kind of
philosophical level, we would be able to agree on sets of principles that applied to sets of
problem areas. And within an area of use, like in C++'s case, what used to be called systems
programming, the area between the hardware and the fluffier parts of the system,
you might very well see a convergence. So these days, you see Rust having adopted RAII.
And some time accuses me for having borrowed it 20 years before they discovered it. But
it's, we're seeing some kind of convergence here instead of relying on garbage collection all
the time. The garbage collection languages are doing things like the dispose patterns and such
that imitate some of the construction, destruction stuff. And they're trying not to use the garbage
collection all the time and things like that. So there's a conversion. But I think we have
to step back to the philosophical level, agree on principles, and then we'll see some conversions,
convergences, and it will be application domain specific.
So a crazy question, but I work a lot with machine learning with deep learning. I'm not
sure if you touched that world much. But you could think of programming as a thing that takes
some input. Programming is the task of creating a program. And the program takes some input and
produces some output. So machine learning systems train on data in order to be able to take an input
and produce output. But they're messy, fuzzy things, much like we as children grow up,
you know, we take some input, we make some output, but we're noisy, we mess up a lot,
we're definitely not reliable biological system or a giant mess. So there's a sense in which
machine learning is a kind of way of programming, but just fuzzy. It's very, very, very different
than C plus plus. Because C plus plus is like it's just like you said, it's extremely reliable.
It's efficient. It's, you know, you can you can measure you can test in a bunch of different ways
with biological systems or machine learning systems, you can't say
much, except sort of empirically saying that 99.8% of the time, it seems to work.
What do you think about this fuzzy kind of programming? Do you even see it as programming?
Is it solely and totally another kind of world?
I think it's a different kind of world. And it is fuzzy. And in my domain, I don't like fuzziness.
That is, people say things like they want everybody to be able to program.
But I don't want everybody to program my, my, my, my, my airplane controls or the car controls.
I want that to be done by engineers. I want that to be done with people that are specifically
educated and trained for doing building things. And it is not for everybody. Similarly, a language
like C++ is not for everybody. It is generated to be a sharp and effective tool for professionals,
basically, and definitely for people who, who, who aim at some kind of precision.
You don't have people doing calculations without understanding math, right? Counting on your fingers
is not going to cut it if you want to fly to the moon. And so there are areas where
an 84% accuracy rate, 16% false positive rate is perfectly acceptable and where people will
probably get no more than 70. You said 98%. I, what I've seen is more like 84. And by,
really, a lot of blood, sweat and tears, you can get up to the 92 and a half.
So this is fine if it is say pre-screening stuff before the human look at it. It is not
good enough for, for life-threatening situations. And so there's lots of areas where, where the
fuzziness is perfectly acceptable and good and better than humans, cheaper than humans.
But it's not the kind of engineering stuff I'm mostly interested in. I worry a bit about
machine learning in the context of cars. You know, much more about this than I do.
I worry too.
But I'm, I'm, I'm sort of an amateur here. I've read some of the papers, but I've not ever done it.
And the, the, the idea that scares me the most is the one I have heard and I don't know how
common it is that you have this AI system, machine learning, all of these trained neural
nets. And when there's something that's too complicated, they ask the human for help.
But the human is reading a book or sleep and he has 30 seconds or three seconds to figure out
what the problem was that the AI system couldn't handle and do the right thing. This is scary.
I mean, how do you do the cut-over between the machine and the human?
It's very, very difficult. And for the designer of one of the most reliable, efficient and powerful
programming languages, C++, I can understand why that world is actually unappealing. It is for
most engineers. To me, it's extremely appealing because we don't know how to get that interaction
right, but I think it's possible, but it's very, very hard. It is. I mean, I was stating a problem,
not a solution. That is possible. I mean, I would much rather never rely on a human. If you're
driving a nuclear reactor, if you're or an autonomous vehicle, it's much better to design
systems written in C++ that never ask human for help. Let, let, let's just get one fact in.
Yeah. All of this AI stuff is on top of C++.
So, so that's one reason I have to keep a weather eye out on what's going on in that field, but I
will never become an expert in that area. But it's a good example of how you separate
different areas of applications, and you have to have different tools, different principles.
And then they interact. No major system today is written in one language, and there are good
reasons for that. When you look back at your life work, what is a, what is a moment? What is a event
creation that you're really proud of? They say, damn, I did pretty good there.
Is it as obvious as the creation of C++?
It's obvious. I've spent a lot of time with C++ and there's a combination of a few good ideas,
a lot of hard work and a bit of luck. And I've tried to get away from it a few times,
but I get dragged in again, partly because I'm most effective in this area and partly because
partly because what I do has much more impact if I do it in the context of C++.
So I have four and a half million people that pick it up tomorrow if I get something right.
If I did it in another field, I would have to start learning, then I have to build it and then
we'll see if anybody wants to use it. One of the things that has kept me going for all of these
years is one, the good things that people do with it and the interesting things they do with it.
And also, I get to see a lot of interesting stuff and talk to a lot of interesting people.
I mean, if it has just been statements on paper or on a screen, I don't think I could have kept
going. But I get to see the telescopes up on Mauna Kea and I actually went and see how Ford
built cars and I got to JPL and see how they do the Mars rovers. There's so much cool stuff going on
and most of the cool stuff is done by pretty nice people and sometimes in very nice places,
Cambridge, Sofia and C++, Silicon Valley. There's more to it than just code, but code is central.
On top of the code are the people in very nice places. Well, I think I speak for
millions of people. We are in saying thank you for creating this language that so many
systems are built on top of that make a better world. So thank you and thank you for talking
today. Yeah, thanks and we'll make it even better. Good.